Material canvas docs (#2315)
o3de/o3de.org: content/docs/atom-guide/look-dev/tools/material-editor.md

---
title: Material Editor
description: Learn how to use the Material Editor to create materials in Atom.
toc: true
---

> ## Overview

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

The **Material Editor** is a standalone application that allows artists to view, edit, and create new materials. This section introduces the Material Editor and describes the editor layout and its individual panels.

For more information about features common to Atom tools, menus, dockable panels, and working with documents, see [Atom Tools Common Features](/docs/atom-guide/look-dev/tools/atom-tools-common-features/). 

> ## Quick Start

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Quick start
```

To get started, launch the Material Editor and create or edit a material. 

### Launching Material Editor
There are multiple ways to launch Material Editor.
- From **Open 3D Engine (O3DE)** Editor select **Main Menu > Tools > Material Editor**
- From the Material Component context menu, select **Open Material Editor...**
- From the Asset Browser, double click on a ".material" or ".materialtype".
- From the Asset Browser, right click on a ".material" or ".materialtype", then select **Open in Material Editor...** 
- Material Editor is also a standalone executable that can be launched directly from a file browser or command console.
  - Launch the executable `<build>\bin\profile\MaterialEditor.exe`

>   - This requires passing the �project-path, followed by the path your project, as a command line argument.

Author: That is correct as long as the project graph is a relative or absolute path from where the command was called. If it was from a file browser you would either have to open a command console, have a shortcut, or type it into the address bar to add the project path. There is also another way to set the project path in the settings registry so that you don't have to type it in. But that's not commonly advertised.

> ### Creating Materials

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Creating materials
```

  - Select **Main Menu > File > New...**.
    - This opens the "Create Material Document" dialog.
  - Select a material type as the basis for your new material.
  - Select a path and file name for the new material.
- Open an existing material
  - Select **Main Menu > File > Open...**.
- Open or create a material from the Asset Browser.

### Editing Materials
- All material editing is done by changing properties in the Material Editor inspector.
- Changes are recorded as properties are edited and can be undone and redone. 

### Child Materials
- Materials can reference a parent material to inherit and override its properties.
- Changes made to the parent, or another ancestor, are automatically reflected in the child material unless the child is overriding those properties.
- Child materials can be created opening an existing material and selecting **Main Menu > File > Save As Child...**. 

### Mirroring Changes in The O3DE Editor
- Materials saved in the Material Editor will be processed by the Asset Processor.
- If the O3DE Editor is open and the saved material is assigned to a Material Component or terrain it will automatically not reload to reflect the changes.

> - Enabling the autosave in Material Editor settings dialog will causes updates to be continuously mirrored in the O3DE Editor.

Author: Correct. As long as the AP is running, if you make changes in the material editor and save them then the main editor will be notified and display those changes. Previously, this was not working correctly and did not work without switching focus back to the main editor. It is now possible to have both of them open simultaneously, make changes in the material editor, save those changes, and see things update in the main editor without switching focus. Additionally, there is now an automatic save feature in the material editor and other tools. Enabling the automatic save feature in material editor will cause any of changes to automatically be mirrored in close to real time in the main editor. The same is true of material canvas except that material canvas does not need auto saving enabled because it's generating the files whenever you make changes. Given time, I would promote this workflow and deprecate the material instance editor.

## Navigating Material Editor

> After Material Editor has opened and initialized it will display the main window, as shown below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you launch Material Editor, you will see the following main window.
```

![Material Editor](/images/atom-guide/tools/material-editor.jpg)

For more information about features common to Atom tools, menus, dockable panels, and working with documents, see [Atom Tools Common Features](/docs/atom-guide/look-dev/tools/atom-tools-common-features/). 

> ### Document Types and Views
> Material Editor supports creating, opening, and editing one type of document.
> 
> #### Material Documents
> Material Documents are the main documents type in Material Editor.
> - ".material" files can be opened and edited.
> - ".materialtype" files can be opened but cannot be saved.
> - The material being edited by the active material document will be displayed on the model in the viewport. 
> - As changes are made to the material through the inspector or script, the material shown in the viewport will automatically updated to reflect the changes.

Reviewer: @gadams3 I think some ideas here can be tied together more cohesively. 
- Can you verify if the sentence about `materialtype` is accurate? The way I understand this is you can only read the file (through Material Editor?), probably for the purpose of knowing what's in it. We're allowed to open it in a text file and edit it there, right? That doesn't need to be included here, just wanted to know. 
- Based on my understanding of these sections, I propose reformatting the sections like this: 
```
## Navigating Material Editor

### Document types

### Views

#### Main menu

#### Viewport

#### Viewport Settings
```

```suggestion
### Document types
Material Editor supports material documents, `.material` and `.materialtype`. You can create, open, and edit `.material files`.  You can also open `.materialtype` files to view it's properties, but you cannot edit them in the Material Editor. 

The material that you're currently editing displays on the model in the viewport. As you edit the material through the inspector or script, the material shown in the viewport automatically updates to reflect the changes.
```

Author: This is mostly correct. Technically you can open and edit a material type as a material document. You can edit the properties and visualize the changes, just as you would a material file. You cannot save a material type from the material editor. However, you can open one, make some changes, and use save as child to save it as a material.

Reviewer: Oh gotcha, I see. So how about this, or something similar:
> You can also open `.materialtype` files, edit its properties, and save it as a new material by choosing **Save As Child...**.

> ## Main Menu
> The main menu contains all of the submenus and actions common to all Atom tools. 
> 
> For more information about features common to Atom tools, menus, dockable panels, and working with documents, see [Atom Tools Common Features](/docs/atom-guide/look-dev/tools/atom-tools-common-features/). 
> 
> ## Viewport
> Use the **Viewport** panel to preview materials applied to models under different lighting conditions.
> 
> {{< note >}}
> The Viewport cannot be closed entirely. If all the tabs are closed, the Viewport shows a default scene that contains a blank model, ground, and natural light. 
> {{< /note >}}
> 
> For more information about the viewport and how to interact with it, see [Atom Tools Viewport](/docs/atom-guide/look-dev/tools/atom-tools-viewport/).  
> 
> ## Viewport Settings
> The Viewport Settings panel displays options to configure the Viewport properties. These properties control how the Viewport appears and which features are active. You can also create or edit configuration presets for the viewport model and the lighting environments. 
> 
> For more information about the viewport settings, see [Atom Tools Viewport](/docs/atom-guide/look-dev/tools/atom-tools-viewport/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Main Menu
The main menu contains all of the submenus and actions common to all Atom tools. 

For more information about features common to Atom tools, menus, dockable panels, and working with documents, see [Atom Tools Common Features](/docs/atom-guide/look-dev/tools/atom-tools-common-features/). 

### Viewport
Use the **Viewport** panel to preview materials applied to models under different lighting conditions.

{{< note >}}
The Viewport cannot be closed entirely. If all the tabs are closed, the Viewport shows a default scene that contains a blank model, ground, and natural light. 
{{< /note >}}

For more information about the viewport and how to interact with it, see [Atom Tools Viewport](/docs/atom-guide/look-dev/tools/atom-tools-viewport/).  

### Viewport Settings
The Viewport Settings panel displays options to configure the Viewport properties. These properties control how the Viewport appears and which features are active. You can also create or edit configuration presets for the viewport model and the lighting environments. 

For more information about the viewport settings, see [Atom Tools Viewport](/docs/atom-guide/look-dev/tools/atom-tools-viewport/).
```

## Troubleshooting
### Material Editor Fails To Launch

> Material Editor normally initializes all of the gems enabled by the active project. In order to reduce start times and system resource utilization, Material Editor, and the other atom tools, includes registry setting files that forcibly disable several standard O3DE gems that are not likely to be needed within the tool.
> 
> If Material Editor fails to launch then it may be because of dependency issues with gems in the active project. Check MaterialEditor.log for any system entity or module initialization errors. If necessary, change or delete the custom registry settings from the Material Editor project registry folder.

Reviewer: > Material Editor normally initializes all of the gems enabled by the active project

@gadams3  
I think this wording may be confusing for users. It sounds like Material Editor is the tool that initializes Gems in a project, which is confusing bc I would expect a more core O3DE system initializes them.  However, I think what this means is that Material Editor is dependent on several Gems, so in order to launch ME, it's dependencies have to be initialized as well. I assume these dependencies include Atom Core Gems that allow ME to function, as well as other Gems that may have material assets ME should be aware of. Does that sound right?

If so, consider the following rewording.  I try to lean away from speaking about the literal technical logic that occurs, and focus only on the details the user needs to troubleshoot. 

```suggestion
Material Editor initializes a set of Gems that allow it to either function properly or discover material assets. The set of Gems includes all of the Gems enabled by the active project, except the standard O3DE Gems that are certainly not needed within the tool. This optimization helps reduce start times and system resource utilization.

If Material Editor fails to launch, then it may be because of dependency issues with Gems in the active project. Check `MaterialEditor.log` for any system entity or module initialization errors. If necessary, change or delete the custom registry settings from the Material Editor project registry folder.
```

Author: To clarify, material editor, material canvas, etc require certain gems regardless of the project. All of the applications that come with O3DE automatically load every gem that the game project enables. There are several gems that we, the developers, know that material editor, material canvas etc, will never need. So, we identified them and block them from initializing. Launching material editor using the automated testing project without these settings would start/rub terrain, physics, emotion FX, an AWS client, script canvas, and much more

Author: This section should be the same for material editor and material canvas. Perhaps it should go into the common features page instead since it applies to all of the tools. This is really important to call out for material editor and material canvas because QA and others were once experiencing problems with it. The wording should mention that we load all of the project gems except for the ones disabled by these settings.
